---
title: 'Avoiding online snooping'
date: Sat, 19 Sep 2015 18:44:08 +0000
draft: false
tags: []
---

This post is a bit different from my usual software related posts and probably has a different target audience, but here goes... There has been more and more talk over the last couple of years about how much we are watched online. This can be by governments, criminals, advertising agencies or even social media companies like facebook or twitter. In this quick post I'm not going to try and convince you that you need these things (but you probably do), but I'm going to share a few easy ways you can make it harder for people to track you online. **VPN** A VPN connection (virtual private network) can help make you more anonymous online. It has the following advantages

*   your web traffic is encrypted so can't easily be read by anyone monitoring you. This means that if a government agency (in the UK at least) want to see what you've been browsing they will need a court order first, which helps you not be involved in mass surveillance operations
*   your IP address is hidden making it harder to be tracked and people will find it harder to find your physical location
*   depending on where your VPN is hosted you can "pretend" you are in that country. So, for example, you can appear to be in america and watch things that are only available on the american Netflix.

The main downside (other than having to set it up) is that it can slow down browsing slightly. I've not really had much trouble with this, but I know that for some people this is pretty important. I use [Private Internet Access](https://www.privateinternetaccess.com/). They have lots of servers all over the world and are very cheap if you pay annually (about £1.50 a month). It's easy to set up and they even have iPhone and android apps. **Adblockers** Adverts on web pages can be used to track your activity as you move between websites, download malware onto your computer and are generally pretty annoying. I'm not going to get into the ethics of this (a lot of websites use adverts as their main stream of income), but I block ads with a simple browser plugin called [adblock](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/adblock/gighmmpiobklfepjocnamgkkbiglidom?hl=en). This one works great on Chrome, but there are lots of alternatives around if your browser isn't supported or it doesn't work well for you. **Anti-Tracking browser plugins** Websites often use tracking software to track your activity online. Some of this is advertising networks, some of it is malicious, some of it is for website analytics, but for me it's all unwanted. I use two plugins, which between them cover most bases: [Ghostery](https://www.ghostery.com/en/) and [Disconnect](https://disconnect.me/). **Social Media** Every page that has a like this on facebook button or share on twitter button is probably helping to let facebook and twitter know your browsing habbits. Staying signed out of twitter and facebook unless you are using them can help stop this. **BONUS: Two factor authentication** This isn't directly related to privacy, but it will help you stay safe online. Two factor authentication means that when you sign into a website they will text you a code to verify that it is actually you, not just someone who knows your username and password. This is a pretty fail safe way of making sure no one can access your accounts, but does rely on  you always having your phone with you. Hopefully these simple and easy to implement tools will help you stay safe and unwatched online. If you have any questions then feel free to [message me](/pages/about-me).